Adds doc for Resource Sharing and Access Control feature (#9667)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _security/access-control/resources.md

- Share and revoke access as a resource owner.
- View and manage all resources as a super-admin.
- Define custom shareable resources through a standardized Service Provider Interface (SPI).

## Enabling the resource sharing extension

To enable the resource sharing extension, set up the plugin and permission settings.

### Plugin settings

To enable resource sharing, add the following settings to `opensearch.yaml`:

```yaml
plugins.security.experimental.resource_sharing.enabled: true
plugins.security.system_indices.enabled: true
```
{% include copy.html %}

For information about implementing this feature in your plugin, see [Resource access control for plugins](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security/blob/main/RESOURCE_ACCESS_CONTROL_FOR_PLUGINS.md).
{: .tip }

### Cluster permissions

The Security plugin must have the following access:

- Permissions to make share, verify, and list requests.
- Shared access to all cluster components, or be the owner of the cluster.

> To grant the resource sharing extension these permissions, add the following role to `roles.yaml`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To grant the resource sharing extension these permissions, add the following roles to `roles.yaml`. These roles will be assigned to anyone conducting resource sharing:
```

## Resource sharing components

The resource sharing extension consists of key components that work together to provide standardized access management.

### API

All sharing metadata is stored in the `.opensearch_resource_sharing` system index, as shown in the following table.

| Field | Type | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `source_idx`  | String | The system index holding the resource |
| `resource_id` | String | The resource ID   |
| `created_by`  | Object | The name of the user who created the resource    |
| `share_with`  | Object | A map of `action-groups` to access definitions  |

### Document structure

The resource sharing metadata is stored as JSON documents that define ownership, permissions, and access patterns. Each document contains fields that specify the resource location, identifier, creator information, and sharing configuration:

```json
{
  "source_idx": ".plugins-ml-model-group",
  "resource_id": "model-group-123",
  "created_by": {
    "user": "darshit"
  },
  "share_with": {
    "default": {
      "users": ["user1"],
      "roles": ["viewer_role"],
      "backend_roles": ["data_analyst"]
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy.html %}

## Action groups

> Action groups define permission levels for shared resources. As of OpenSearch 3.0, the only supposted action group for resource sharing is `default`. To share resources across the action groups, use the `share_with` array in that resource's configuration and add wildcards for each default role:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Action groups define permission levels for shared resources. As of OpenSearch 3.0, the only supported action group for resource sharing is `default`. To share resources across the action groups, use the `share_with` array in that resource's configuration and add wildcards for each default role:
```

---
layout: default
title: Sharing resources between access roles
parent: Access control
nav_order: 130
---

# Sharing resources between access roles

**Introduced 3.0**
{: .label .label-purple }

This is an experimental feature and we don't recommend using it in a production environment. For updates on the feature's progress or to provide feedback, join the discussion in the [OpenSearch forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/).    
{: .warning}

The Resource Sharing extension in the OpenSearch Security plugin provides fine-grained, resource-level access management for plugin-declared resources. It builds on top of existing index-level authorization to enable you to:

- Share and revoke access as a resource owner.
- View and manage all resources as a super-admin.
- Define custom shareable resources through a standardized Service Provider Interface (SPI).

## Enabling the resource sharing extension

> To enable the resource sharing extension, follow these steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable the resource sharing extension, set up the plugin and permission settings.
```

### Plugin settings

To enable resource sharing, add the following settings to `opensearch.yaml`:

```yaml
plugins.security.experimental.resource_sharing.enabled: true
plugins.security.system_indices.enabled: true
```
{% include copy.html %}

For information about implementing this feature in your plugin, see [Resource access control for plugins](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security/blob/main/RESOURCE_ACCESS_CONTROL_FOR_PLUGINS.md).
{: .tip }

### Cluster permissions

The Security plugin must have the following access:

- Permissions to make share, verify, and list requests.
- Shared access to all cluster components, or be the owner of the cluster.

To grant the resource sharing extension these permissions, add the following role to `roles.yaml`:

```yaml
sample_full_access:
  cluster_permissions:
    - 'cluster:admin/sample-resource-plugin/*'

sample_read_access:
  cluster_permissions:
    - 'cluster:admin/sample-resource-plugin/get'
```

> {% include copy.html %}

Reviewer 2: To which users shall these roles be assigned to? Anyone who shall be able to do resource sharing?

## Resource sharing components

The resource sharing extension consists of key components that work together to provide standardized access management. The primary component is the Service Provider Interface (SPI), which serves as the foundation for plugin integration and resource management.

### opensearch-security-spi

> The `opensearch-security-spi` component:

Author: Yes.

- Defines `ResourceSharingExtension` for plugin implementations.
- Tracks registered resource plugins at startup.
- Exposes a `ResourceSharingClient` for performing share, revoke, verify, and list operations.

> You can customize this component based on the SPI implementation. To customize, create an extension file `src/main/resources/META-INF/services/org.opensearch.security.spi.ResourceSharingExtension` containing your SPI's class name:

Author: This is purely for plugin developers. It will be used when a new/existing plugin declares themselves as Resource plugin. Similar model is already in place for JobScheduler.

```
com.example.MyResourceSharingExtension
```
{% include copy.html %}

### API

All sharing metadata is stored in the `.opensearch_resource_sharing` system index, as shown in the following table.

| Field | Type | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `source_idx`  | String | The system index holding the resource |
| `resource_id` | String | The resource ID   |
| `created_by`  | Object | The name of the user who created the resource    |
| `share_with`  | Object | A map of `action-groups` to access definitions  |

#### Java client APIs

Use the following classes when interacting with the extension through the Java client:

```java
ResourceSharingClient client = ResourceSharingClientAccessor.getResourceSharingClient();

// Verify access
client.verifyResourceAccess(resourceId, indexName, listener);

// Share resource
client.share(resourceId, indexName, recipients, listener);

// Revoke access
client.revoke(resourceId, indexName, recipients, listener);

// List accessible IDs
client.getAccessibleResourceIds(indexName, listener);
```
{% include copy.html %}

### Document structure

> The resource sharing metadata is stored as JSON documents that define ownership, permissions, and access patterns. Each document contains fields that specify the resource location, identifier, creator information, and sharing configuration:

Reviewer: Where would I find or add this document? Is it an API call to the security plugin?

Author: This is not visible to regular users directly as it is hidden behind SystemIndex Protection.

For plugins intending to declare a protected resource, they can retrieve the information about who can access this resources by simply calling security client's hasPermission.

End users will, in future, iterations be able to control who they can share the resource with once plugin implements those APIs and makes the info available via dashboard.

At this point, the documentation intends to serve plugin developers, with allowing admins to optionally opt in to this feature by enabling feature flag.

We are trying to implement a sharing model that doesn't exist in OpenSearch yet. This is the first step by centralizing the sharing information to security, rather than plugins storing it individually.

Reviewer: What would the `hasPermission` call look like?

Author: Plugins would call the client by passing the id of the resources, the index name where the resource sits and a listener to receive the response. This will then be evaluated on security plugin side and a boolean response will be sent through the listener.

```json
{
  "source_idx": ".plugins-ml-model-group",
  "resource_id": "model-group-123",
  "created_by": {
    "user": "darshit"
  },
  "share_with": {
    "default": {
      "users": ["user1"],
      "roles": ["viewer_role"],
      "backend_roles": ["data_analyst"]
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy.html %}

## Action groups

> Action groups define permission levels for shared resources, for example, `default`. To share resources across the action groups, use the `share_with` array in that resource's configuration and add wildcards for each default role:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Action groups define permission levels for shared resources. As of OpenSearch 3.0, the only supposted action group for resource sharing is `default`. To share resources across the action groups, use the `share_with` array in that resource's configuration and add wildcards for each default role:
```

```json
{
  "share_with": {
    "default": {
      "users": ["*"],
      "roles": ["*"],
      "backend_roles": ["*"]
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy.html %}

To keep a resource private, keep the `share_with` array empty:

```json
{ "share_with": {} }
```
{% include copy.html %}

## Restrictions

Before implementing resource sharing and access control, be aware of the following limitations that help maintain security and consistency across the system:

- Only resource owners or super-admins can share or revoke access.
- Resources must reside in system indexes.
- Disabling system index protection exposes resources to direct index-level access.

## Best practices

To ensure secure and efficient implementation of resource sharing and access control, follow these recommended practices:

- Declare and register extensions correctly.
- Use the SPI client APIs instead of manual index queries.

> - Enable only on fresh 3.0.0+ clusters to avoid upgrade issues.

Reviewer: What do we mean by "fresh" clusters?

Author: This feature is intended to be enabled only on brand new clusters.

Author: In next iteration, we will add a migration path to enable usage on existing clusters.
